Today we will talk about our own turnover capital.
First of all, you remember that capital can be both private and borrowed.
In this case, we will talk only about our own capital, not about the capital that is attracted to the enterprise.
Secondly, all capital can be represented as the main and the turnover.
As you remember, the main capital is the hard-to-realize assets,
such as land, buildings, infrastructure, equipment, non-material assets and other basic resources.
We have already talked about this part of capital in the previous topics.
Today we will talk about the turnover part of capital.
The turnover part of capital is the hard-to-realize assets, such as reserves,
debit debt, short-term financial investments and money.
You remember that all these parts of capital are represented in the left part of the balance sheet,
where we have the assets.
The turnover part of capital takes up a large share of the enterprise.
Each has its own share, but in general, their share is quite large.
This is the most mobile part of capital,
and the state of this part of capital depends on the results of the enterprise's economic activity
and the financial state of the enterprise.
It is very important for the enterprise to know whether it has turnover capital,
what state it is in, and how it works.
The state of the enterprise's own turnover capital depends on the stability of the financial state of the enterprise.
It depends on the optimal distribution of funds at the stage of the process of turnover.
The process of turnover includes the supply of the enterprise,
then production and finally the production surplus.
At each stage of the process of turnover there are their own turnover funds.
The financial state of the enterprise depends on the optimal distribution of their shares at the stages of the process of turnover.
If the state of the enterprise is not optimal, it starts to go crazy.
At the optimal distribution, the enterprise feels great.
At the first stage, where the supply is, there are the reserves.
The reserves are a very important part of the asset.
At the stage of production surplus there is the debt and cash.
This is how the enterprise's own turnover funds are distributed at the stages of the process of turnover.
As we can see, the financial state depends on the distribution of the funds at the stages of the process of turnover.
It is impossible to find the optimal state and say that all enterprises should adhere to it.
The size of the investment in each stage of the process of turnover depends on the enterprise's distribution characteristics.
There are enterprises that require a lot of material reserves,
where the material production is concentrated to a very high degree.
There are enterprises with a long production cycle, where the largest part is in the unfinished production.
Thus, depending on the enterprise's distribution characteristics, the distribution of the funds will be one way or another.
If you want to know whether the distribution of the funds of your enterprise is optimal,
you need to look at the optimal distribution of the funds for the enterprise that belongs to your enterprise.
Then you can compare your enterprise with this optimal distribution.
The turnover assets can be distributed depending on their liquidity level.
You should remember that the balance of assets is based on the liquidity level,
that is, on the speed of their transformation into monetary form.
The higher the liquidity level, the faster it is transformed into monetary form,
the lower the line is in the balance of the enterprise.
The slowest, fastest and most liquid assets are the reserves of the finished product,
the raw materials and the unfinished production.
The whole warehouse is full of reserves that are needed for production.
Today we will talk about this separately, specifically about the reasons for the need of reserves for the enterprise.
Today, at this moment, we are only saying that the reserves are related to the slow-releasing assets.
Moreover, some reserves can be so slow-releasing that they become non-liquid.
The fast-releasing turnover assets are the debt and the funds on the deposits.
The debt, as you remember from our previous lectures,
are the funds that other enterprises owe us.
First, there are contractual relations, according to which the terms of the return of the debt are determined.
Second, each enterprise is actively working to return the debt,
so the debt is returned to the enterprise more or less quickly.
This is why it is related to the fast-releasing turnover assets.
The funds on the deposits are dependent on the enterprise.
The enterprise deposits the free funds on the deposit accounts in the banks.
It can deposit them or not, depending on the purpose and the need of the enterprise.
The enterprise can't deposit the funds at the moment,
or they need to be saved for the near future, and they deposit them on the deposits.
But you should remember that the deposits are temporary deposits,
so they can't be taken back at any moment.
If you need the funds at any moment,
you should not deposit them, but leave them on your account.
Then you can use them at any time, any day.
The most liquid turnover assets are the funds and the short-term market securities.
The short-term market securities are the funds,
so it is a given that you need to turn them into money.
In some cases, it can be a foreign currency,
which can be transferred to any other country, including the Russian currency.
But it will take some time.
The short-term market securities are also an interesting document.
You can quickly turn them into money if the term of their termination is approaching,
or if you have a need to get rid of them and turn them into money.
You can also divide the assets into stable and unstable ones.
The stable assets are the main assets and some of the turnover assets,
which are at an unchanging level during the year.
Some of the assets change their form during this period,
and some of them remain unchanged.
The ones that remain unchanged are called stable assets,
and the rest of the assets are called unstable assets.
The unstable assets are represented by the passive assets.
The passive assets are the sources of the enterprise's funds.
Depending on the source of the funds,
the passive assets are divided into the own and the borrowed ones.
The banks, other enterprises, and their partners
take the assets on the market.
In any case, they are not the enterprise's assets.
They are taken for a certain period of time,
and the enterprise's assets are the loans and loans.
The short-term assets include the loans,
the debt, and some of the loans and loans
that will be taken during this period.
It is very important for an enterprise to manage its assets and passives correctly.
What does it mean to manage them correctly?
As we know from previous lectures,
the assets and passives are characterized by certain periods of their use.
The main thing is that the time should match.
The time period of the transition from one form to another should match.
The time period of tracking the time period,
the coordination of the assets and passives,
and the coordination of the assets and passives.
If we imagine a complex management system,
it includes the transformation of the current financial needs
into a negative amount so that the enterprise can work
and manage the assets and passives.
Now we will look at the steps of complex management.
We will see how the enterprise uses them,
which of them is more important,
and how the enterprise uses them.
First, we should look at the current needs.
The enterprise needs to purchase stocks,
and other financial resources to cover the current needs.
The enterprise uses various sources of money,
but among them we can distinguish a certain sequence of use of funds.
First of all, the enterprise uses its own money.
Why? Because it is free, it is already its own.
It does not need to pay for anything,
it can use its own money.
In any case, business does not allow to relax,
but nevertheless, it is the least evil.
What can you do if you do not have enough money?
It is not a big deal,
but the use of money is a sign of effective management.
The second thing is the creditors' debt.
The creditors' debt is what you owe to your partners.
For example, they gave you the raw material for the production,
but you did not have to pay for it.
You did not have to pay in advance,
you did not have to pay in cash.
The easiest way to use the creditors' debt is to pay for the raw material.
Of course, it is not free,
but you have to remember that the raw material is free only in the mining industry.
What if you do not even have enough creditors' debt?
What if there are cash-out breaks,
but you do not have enough money?
The creditors' debt is what you owe to your partners.
The enterprise starts to contact the bank
to get the cash for a short period of time.
It is not more than one year.
It is a short-term loan.
It is not a loan from the bank,
but a loan from another business partner.
It is a loan.
We talked about it in the previous lectures.
If we need short-term loans,
we can use the sources of their payment.
Different sources have different colors in terms of the benefit of their use.
Some are more beneficial, some are less.
We need to know the difference.
The relationship between a businessman and the world is not only a contractual one,
but also a human one.
The most beneficial sources of short-term loans are the ones from the creditors.
Everyone in the business is doing it.
It is a norm.
It is a normal phenomenon.
It does not cause any tension between the businessmen.
The second source is the payment of the money from the employees.
Pay attention.
The form of payment is very specific.
It is called the delay of the salary of the employees.
The businessman does not pay the salary in time.
The money is used for the business.
The employees of the enterprise are the ones who lend money to the businessman.
It is a free form of payment.
I have never met a businessman who would pay the salary in time
with the interest of his employees.
It is a free form of payment.
It is not a payment from the commercial credit,
or from the bank loan.
The salary of the employees cannot be increased to infinity.
The employees are ready to suffer the delay of the salary
in order to make the enterprise better.
But they are not ready to never receive the salary.
Even if the businessman does not pay the salary,
the situation at the enterprise deteriorates.
The current staff is increasing.
The employees are getting better.
The employees are more interested in the payment of the salary
than in the return of the active participation in the production process.
The businessman risks to be left alone at the enterprise.
He does not have any plans.
Sooner or later he stops using this source.
This source exists, but it is limited.
It is a life-saving circle that can be used for a short time.
If you know that your situation at the enterprise will improve,
you will be able to recover your situation.
There is another source.
It is a tax payment.
The state does not pay the taxes in time.
The state is a machine that does not tolerate the lack of repayment.
The state demands the payment of taxes.
The state also demands the payment of fines.
If the profitability of the business is not higher than the fines,
then it is better not to use this source.
If the business is very profitable,
The state understands that it will have to pay more fines.
This is a good source for short-term money.
The money could be used to increase the stock.
Everything that is excessive is not good.
There should be an optimal amount of stocks at the enterprise.
The excess of stocks is not used.
It is a dead weight.
The frozen capital is not used.
It is needed for other purposes.
The excess of stocks is harmful.
The enterprise should make sure that it does not have excess stocks.
We will talk about this later.
The enterprise should have an optimal amount of stocks.
There should be a lot of capital dead weight,
but not enough stocks.
There is no small component.
The car is not a complete car.
There should be stocks, but not too much.
The next negative aspect is the excessive payments.
The enterprise receives the goods from the suppliers,
and we are part of the chain.
We provide the goods to the suppliers.
The business is set up in a way that the goods are provided
to us in the form of goods.
The most important thing is not to provide the goods,
but to not violate the optimal amount.
If you start to provide the goods too much,
you will lose the turnover.
You will have problems that you do not need.
Each enterprise decides for itself
what payment to make to its partners.
It is a threat to the partners.
If you cannot make your products,
it is not a threat to the enterprise.
Payment is not a gesture of charity.
The market should be the same as your competitors.
If your competitors provide goods,
you should provide them too.
But you should not provide goods without limits.
You should provide goods in a limited amount.
If we sum up all the needs of the enterprise,
we will get the current financial needs.
The current financial needs are equal to the amount of reserves
plus the debitory debt.
You need reserves and a debitory debt
to provide the goods to your partners.
The current financial needs are equal to the debt
to your partners.
The two important things are the needs
and the help provided by the market.
The enterprise is interested in reducing its reserves.
We have already said that it is not profitable
to reduce the reserves.
But it is not less than the optimal value.
The optimal value causes a failure in the enterprise.
The loss is the benefit from the reduction.
The enterprise is interested in reducing its debt.
The enterprise is not profitable.
The debt is a state of necessity.
It exists only in the market.
It is not profitable to reduce the debt.
But it is not interested in excessive debt.
It is not interested in excessive debt.
The enterprise is interested in increasing its credit.
It is a great idea to live in a business
where everyone is lending you money.
But you are developing without using your own money.
The enterprise has its limits.
You are not being credited for charity.
If you don't get a loan,
you are not being credited for charity.
The debt is a debt that you have to pay back.
You can't increase the debt forever.
You are not getting the money for free.
You are paying for it.
The enterprise has a number of factors.
The longer the production process,
the more money is in the form of assets.
The production process should be minimized.
The businessmen are interested in selling the product as soon as possible.
If you don't have the finished product,
you lose your partner.
You should have as much finished product as possible.
You should be happy to see your partner.
The growth of production is influenced by the growth of demand.
The higher the growth of production,
the more money you should invest in the production.
It requires additional finances.
The seasonality of production is also influenced.
Modern business is seasonal.
The harvest is seasonal.
The seasonality of production is also influenced.
Construction work is seasonal.
Construction workers have no money for construction.
They should save money for the summer and for the spring.
The production of clothing is seasonal.
The clothing industry is adjusted to the season.
The industry works unevenly for a year.
The seasonality of production is also influenced.
The season of buying a flat is also influenced.
There is a period of vacations when the sales of a flat are slow.
After the vacations, the sales of a flat increase.
The production of a flat is seasonal.
The company has a liquidity gap.
The company has to foresee the liquidity gap.
The state of the industry is also influenced.
The industry is not on the island.
There are going to be a new products that will be more and more popular.
If the fashion state is not monitored,
people will stop buying it.
The market needs to be in a good condition.
In addition to the above mentioned factors,
the current financial needs are also affected by the added value norm.
More precisely, the need of the enterprise to meet the added value norm.
It is clear that each enterprise would like to make as much profit as possible
and, accordingly, to have as much added value as possible.
But, there are two ends of the stick.
On the one hand, in order to get more added value,
the enterprise should try to sell the product at a higher price.
The same value would, of course, provide a high added value norm.
But, a higher price for the product that is produced by the enterprise
requires the enterprise to take additional measures.
First, it is not enough to increase the price for the produced product.
One of the options is to move to an oligopoly or a monopoly.
If you are a monopolist, then you increase the price
and it is easier to implement it, because you have no competitors.
If you are an oligopolist, and you have three to five main competitors in this industry,
you have to enter into a conspiracy to become a monopolist through a conspiracy
and, due to this, to achieve a higher added value norm.
But, the elasticity of the product also plays a role.
Do you remember our first lecture?
We talked about the elasticity of the product.
If the product is not elastic, for example, salt,
then the price increase does not affect the ability to implement the product.
You sell the same amount of product as before, but at a higher price.
If the added value norm increases, the enterprise feels euphoria from the additional profit.
But if your product is elastic,
and it is more and more elastic,
then the price increase is not a good condition.
The thing is that if you are not a monopolist or an oligopolist in a state of conspiracy,
then the price increase leads to the fact that consumers stop buying this product,
but buy the product from your competitors,
who did not increase the price.
In order to get more profit,
you should not increase the price,
but decrease it, but increase the volume of the produced product.
When we talk about the added value norm,
we are talking about the price increase.
The price increase is good for non-elastic products,
or for elastic products,
but which are still produced by monopolists or oligopolists.
Then, due to these economic forms,
the product itself becomes non-elastic.
And it is possible to sell it in the same amount,
but at a higher price.
If you are not a very large enterprise,
and you cannot be a monopolist or an oligopolist,
but you are in a competitive environment,
you should remember that the price increase
is not the only way to get profit from the business.
You can reduce the price,
reduce the added value norm,
and the added value norm will increase.
If you are not an oligopolist or a monopolist,
do not despair.
The main thing is to increase the volume of the produced product.
Then you will live perfectly,
without increasing the price.
To cover the current financial needs,
the enterprise needs financial resources.
Where does the enterprise get the financial resources
to meet its needs?
We have already said that the best financial resources
are the ones that are owned by the enterprise.
But if the enterprise does not have enough of them,
and if it does not have enough of the credit debt,
then it goes to the financial market
and gets the financial resources from the market
in the form of a loan or a bank loan.
I remind you again that a loan is getting financial resources
from the same business partners as you,
and a loan is getting financial resources from the banks.
We have already talked about this many times,
but I will repeat it again.
A loan or a bank loan is a way to cover the current financial needs.
We are talking about short-term financial needs,
so we are talking about short-term loans or bank loans.
In addition to these,
there is an opportunity to issue a VEXL.
These enterprises are often used.
A VEXL is a very convenient form of short-term financing.
You issue a VEXL yourself,
you do not have to go to any financial institution.
There is a law that regulates the content of the VEXL,
what should be indicated in the VEXL.
The form of the VEXL is determined by you,
so that you can write the VEXL on a clean piece of paper.
The VEXL should be issued,
but the most important thing is that it is accepted.
When you are allowed to take a VEXL instead of money,
you are using the reputation of a reliable business partner.
You are trusted, and you are allowed to take a VEXL instead of money.
A VEXL is an urgent payment that you promise to return.
You are not allowed to take a VEXL,
but you can return it after a certain period of time.
You receive a VEXL and return the money with the interest rate.
If you are a reliable business partner,
you will be allowed to take a VEXL.
If you are not reliable,
you will not be able to use such a form of attraction.
You can use Factoring instead of VEXL.
It is a new form of financing,
new in the Russian market.
It is not used in the world.
Factoring has been used in all countries for a long time,
but in the Russian market it is a new form.
It is used in the world for a long time,
but not all companies use it.
Not all companies use it.
It is important to talk about it,
because Factoring has a serious future.
What is Factoring?
You can imagine when you should contact it.
Factoring is used by production companies,
who produce products
and then transfer them to consumers
in the form of a commercial loan.
But a company cannot extend a commercial loan to infinity,
because it has a fixed limited amount of money.
A company cannot extend a commercial loan to infinity,
If a company wants to develop its production,
it has to increase the amount of goods in the form of a commercial loan.
It needs money.
If all the easier forms are used,
and they cannot be used,
then a company can use a special form of loan.
But it is not provided by banks.
Banks participate in it.
Factoring companies are created by banks.
A company provides a commercial loan
and transfers the documents to a factoring company.
A company exchanges the debt
a company has to cover the debt.
Thus, a company gets the money
it needs to cover the debt.
A company can use this money for further production.
A company does not have to wait for the return of money from its trading partners.
Trading partners can get a very long term loan,
but a company gets the money right away.
But a company gets the money right away.
It is very convenient.
But you have to assume that all the convenience is not free.
If you receive money from a factoring company,
you have to pay it.
You have to pay a bank a percentage of its credit.
The same goes for factoring companies.
You have to pay a certain fee for the services it provides.
So, if you receive money from a bank or a factoring company,
all the services are not free.
There is a certain fee for them.
The bank percentage is even less than the factoring percentage.
Therefore, a bank loan is always taken earlier than a factoring loan.
Factoring is the use of money.
A bank provides money to a factoring company,
and the factoring company provides it to you.
You pay a bank a percentage of its credit,
and a factoring company a percentage of its credit.
Therefore, factoring is more expensive than a bank loan.
But we have already said that we have taken all the bank loans.
Banks do not give us more money,
so we had to turn to a factoring company.
We have to pay for the services.
But the question is,
is a credit or factoring company profitable?
The answer is simple,
but we have to fixate it.
The thing is that there is a profitability of a business.
How profitable is it to do business?
The profitability of a business should be higher than the percentage you pay for the factoring.
In this case, if this condition is met,
it is profitable for you to use the factoring.
Therefore, no matter how much you take the factoring,
the result will be profitable for you.
This is the delta that arises between the profitability of your business
and the percentage you have to pay for the use of the factoring.
This is the result of your financial operations.
This brings additional income to the company.
But if a businessman has a business that is less profitable
than the percentage you have to pay to the bank or a factoring company,
then it is not profitable to use these funds.
Because you will pay more for these funds than you will get from using them in the business.
Therefore, before you go to the bank or a factoring company,
you need to look at the profitability of your business
and compare it with the percentage you have to pay for the use of the factoring.
And this is the result of your financial operations.
And, finally, I would like to make a small but very interesting remark.
For small and medium-sized enterprises,
there is a unique feature.
It is so unique that it is a sin not to know about it.
The fact is that these enterprises can build their business
in such a way that they can not even imagine
that they will be able to build a business in such a way
that they will have a negative impact on the system of their financial needs.
That is, they will have more money than they need.
Do you remember that in our formula we said
that the current need is determined by the need for reserves
and the debt of the debitor and the minus of the reserve of the debt of the creditor?
In this way, the system of financial needs
is built in such a way that it is not profitable to use it.
And if the creditor's debt exceeds the debitor's and the reserve,
then you get into a unique situation
when you have to borrow more money than you need to borrow from others.
Can you imagine?
Then you are in a situation
when you work exclusively with the help of the creditors.
And this is a very interesting situation.
You work exclusively with the help of creditors.
And you did not specially borrow them.
This is the situation on the market.
You work in a situation when you are constantly credited.
And in this situation you can be in for a very long time.
This is an amazing situation.
Therefore, small and medium-sized enterprises should strive to get into it.
Because the reserves of raw materials give more money than you need
to carry out the production process
and issue a commodity loan to your customers.
This is an amazing situation.
I wish every businessman who is watching this lecture
to be in such a state.